
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

          Readme file for the Intel(R) Quiet System Technology (QST)
                  Hard Disk Drive (HDD) Temperature Service

       Copyright (C) 2008-2009, Intel Corporation. All Rights Reserved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Table of contents:
------------------

1. Service Overview
2. Service Setup
3. Known Issues


1. Service Overview
-------------------

In many systems, temperature sensors exist that cannot be directly accessed by
Intel(R) QST. Only sensors that are embedded in the chipset or present in
devices on the SST and PECI busses can be accessed directly. Situations could
thus arise wherein specific hardware components begin overheating, yet
Intel(R) QST remains unaware of the situation.

If software running on the Host Processor somehow became aware of these
situations, it could react by overriding Intel(R) QST's fan speed control.
Doing so will prevent Intel(R) QST from properly responding to the temperature
inputs that it does have access to, however. In order to better address this
issue, the concept of a Virtual Temperature Monitor (VTM) has been introduced
into the Intel(R) QST design. VTMs differ from standard Temperature Monitors
in only one aspect: they have no physical temperature sensor associated with
them. Instead, software running on the host processor must regularly provide
these Monitors with updated temperature readings as changes occur.

This package implements a Windows Service that makes temperature readings from
Hard Disk Drives (HDDs) available to Intel(R) QST. It accomplishes this by
communicating with the Self-Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Technology
(S.M.A.R.T.) that is provided by these HDDs. For those HDDs that support
Temperature as one of their S.M.A.R.T. attributes, these temperatures can be
regularly extracted and delivered to Intel(R) QST.

The Service determines how many VTMs are enabled and configured to monitor
HDD temperature sensors. If none are supported, the Service terminates itself.
If there are more VTMs for HDDs than there are HDDs that expose their
temperature, the Service will send 0 (zero) as the temperature reading to the
extra VTMs. This will ensure that fans are not overridden to 100% because no
temperature readings are available.


2. Service Setup
----------------

Enabling the Intel(R) QST HDD Temperature Service is accomplished by first
configuring Intel(R) QST to support HDD temperature monitoring and then
installing the Intel(R) QST HDD Temperature Service.

2a. Configuring Intel(R) QST for HDD Temperature Monitoring

The first step in the installation process enables the monitoring of HDD
temperatures in the Intel(R) QST configuration. This involves the enabling of
VTMs for each hard drive and, presuming that fan speed control decision-making
should involve these inputs, the enabling of Temperature Response Units for
each VTM and the inclusion of the these responses in the fan weighting matrix.

The first step in this process involves the determination of how many HDDs are
present that can actually support temperature exposure. The package includes a
tool, QstDiskTest, that will detail the (S.M.A.R.T.) capabilities of the HDDs
present. Once you know how many drives can support temperature monitoring, you
can begin the process of enabling support for them in the Intel(R) QST
configuration...

i.  Virtual Temperature Monitors need to be enabled and appropriately
    configured for each HDD. An example of how to set up an entry in the
    configuration file follows:

            :
            :
        [TemperatureMonitor7]
        Enabled=TRUE
        Usage=15                            ;; Hard Drive Temperature
        DeviceAddress=NONE                  ;; Virtual Temperature Monitor
        GetReadingCommand=NONE              ;; Virtual Temperature Monitor
        RelativeReadings=FALSE              ;; HDDs give absolute temperatures
        RelativeConversionFactor=0.00       ;; no conversion necessary
        AccuracyCorrectionSlope=1.00        ;; no adjustments necessary
        AccuracyCorrectionOffset=0.00       ;; no adjustments necessary
        TimeoutNonCritical=120
        TimeoutCritical=240
        TimeoutNonRecoverable=254
        TemperatureNominal=32.00
        TemperatureNonCritical=55.00        ;; Consult HDD specification for
        TemperatureCritical=60.00           ;; information on the appropriate
        TemperatureNonRecoverable=65.00     ;; temperature thresholds to use
            :
            :

ii. Temperature Response Units need to be enabled and appropriately configured
    for each HDD what will be involved in fan speed control decision-making.
    An example of how to set up an entry in the configuration file entry
    follows:

            :
            :
        [TemperatureResponse7]
        Enabled=TRUE
        Usage=15                            ;; Hard Drive Temperature
        TemperatureMonitor=7
        SmoothingWindow=10
        TemperatureLimit=60.00              ;; Consult HDD specification for
        AllOnTemperature=65.00              ;; information on the appropriate
                                            ;; temperature thresholds to use
        ProportionalGain=1.00
        IntegralGain=5.00
        DerivativeGain=400.00
        IntegralTimeWindow=5
        DerivativeTimeWindow=15
            :
            :

iii.Each fan controller that should be influenced by HDD temperatures needs to
    have non-zero weightings assigned to its weighting parameters. This would
    be similar to the following:

            :
            :
        [FanController2]
            :
            :
        TempResponse1Weighting=20.00
        TempResponse2Weighting=5.00
        TempResponse3Weighting=100.00
        TempResponse4Weighting=0.00
        TempResponse5Weighting=100.00
        TempResponse6Weighting=25.00
        TempResponse7Weighting=100.00       ;; Weighting for HDD cooling
        TempResponse8Weighting=0.00
        TempResponse9Weighting=0.00
        TempResponse10Weighting=0.00
        TempResponse11Weighting=0.00
        TempResponse12Weighting=0.00
            :
            :

2b. Installing the Intel(R) QST HDD Temperature Service

The framework that was used to create the QST HDD Temperature Service provides
support for using the Service executable for installing and uninstalling the
Service into the Windows Service Manager. It also can be used to obtain
information regarding whether or not the Service is installed and operational.
While this is extremely helpful when debugging and testing Services, it is
appropriate to use more sophisticated mechanisms for installing Services in
production environments.

A sample program, QstDiskTest, has been included with the Service. This
program will scan for all hard drives that support S.M.A.R.T. and then
determine whether these drives also support the exposure of a temperature
attribute. The program produces a report on the drives that are present,
detailing which can be supported by the Service. It also exits with a non-zero
error code if there are drives that can be supperted by the Service. This
error code can be used in scripting environments and installation programs to
determine whether the installation of the Service is worthwhile.



3. Known Issues List
---------------------

* Capabilities

 -Title:        Little support for secondary HDD interfaces
 -ID:           N/A
 -Symptoms:     Temperature reporting capability not identified for HDDs
                connected to secondary disk interfaces
 -Cause:        The libSMART library provides support for SATA HDDs that are
                connected to the SATA interfaces offered by the ICH and are
                serviced by the Intel(R) Matrix Storage Technology Driver.
                This includes drives with AHCI enabled and drives contained
                within RAID arrays. The library also provides support for
                IDE/PATA and SATA drives that are connected to secondary non-
                Intel interfaces, provided the drivers for these interfaces
                support the Microsoft/Compaq S.M.A.R.T. IOCTL interface. This
                will not be the case for secondary RAID solutions, however.
 -Impact:       HDDs connected to these secondary interfaces will not be
                supported.
 -Resolution:   No resolution planned. The user is at liberty to implement
                support for any additional interfaces they deem useful.
                Implementations that are provided to Intel will be considered
                for inclusion in subsequent releases of this SDK.



* Defects

 -Title:        Fan Speed Spike when first temperature update sent to QST Core
                for VTM
 -ID:           2112308
 -Symptoms:     When the Intel(R) QST HDD Temperature Service begins sending
                temperature updates to the QST Subsystem, fan controllers that
                are configured with fairly significant weightings of the HDD
                temperature response will see a temporary (approx. 30 second)
                spike in the duty cycle being output.
 -Cause:        This is a bug in the QST firmware included in the Series 3 and
                965 chipsets. It currently begins responding to HDD
                temperatures immediately after power on, not from the point
                when readings are actually available.
 -Impact:       The temporary spike(s) are noticable but, once settled, the
                response will properly follow temperature change from that
                point onward.
 -Resolution:   This bug has been addressed in the QST firmware for Series 4
                and later chipsets.



 -Title:        Support disabling of non-recoverable timeout for Virtual Temp
                Monitors
 -ID:           1004183
 -Symptoms:     Temperature Monitors assigned to HDD temperature monitoring
                enter the non-recoverable state and associated Fan Controllers
                are overridden to 100% duty cycle.
 -Cause:        As the title infers, the issue is that the QST firmware for
                Series 3 and 965 chipsets do not support the disabling of
                non-recoverable timeouts. As a result, if the startup of the
                Windows O/S and/or the startup of the Intel(R) QST HDD
                Temperature Service is delayed beyond the length of the
                maximum non-recoverable timeout supported by QST (namely 254
                seconds), the temperature monitors will timeout and enter the
                non-recoverable state. This error then causes the Fan
                Controllers to be overridden to protect the system from the
                problem.
 -Impact:       If the startup of the Windows O/S and/or the Intel(R) QST HDD
                Temperature Service is delayed, the fan controllers will be
                overridden to maximum duty cycle until temperature readings
                become available.
 -Resolution:   This bug has been addressed in the QST firmware for Series 4
                and later chipsets.


-------------------------------------------------------------------
 * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.


